About Syncfusion 
Founded by industry experts in 2001, Syncfusion, Inc. provides the broadest range of enterprise-class software components and tools for the Microsoft .NET platform. 

With Syncfusion, developers can move beyond simply coding applications to delivering real business innovation - the elegant user interfaces, business intelligence dashboards, and sophisticated reporting that today's business users need, in the formats they demand. Our award winning .NET components and controls are designed to meet your evolving development needs, whether you're working in Silverlight, ASP.NET MVC, ASP.NET, WPF, or Windows Forms. 

At Syncfusion, we uncompromisingly strive for excellence in order to offer the very best value to our customers - from small ISVs, to global IT consultancies and Fortune 100 companies. 

.NET components for enterprise class applications 

Working with Syncfusion Essential Studio, you can quickly and easily add cutting edge functionality and the very latest look and feel to your Microsoft .NET applications, taking the grunt work out of the development cycle and freeing you to focus on the core business logic of your applications. 

Syncfusion is a true partner in our customers' development efforts, enabling extensive customization and delivering round-the-clock support. Syncfusion remains active in the development community by maintaining Syncfusion FAQs, a valuable resource for the Microsoft development community, and actively supporting regional .NET user groups. 

The Syncfusion advantage 

Built with the future in mind: Our products are geared toward long life-cycle applications and are architected to meet high standards for flexibility and maintainability. We provide comprehensive support for the latest technologies, including Visual Studio 2010 and .NET 4, as well as JQuery, AJAX, and SharePoint. 

Full source code: We believe in empowering developers with source code; ours is written to be redistributed and shipped in a tightly integrated manner - use our components in debug mode at the flick of a switch. 

First-rate technical support: Online, phone, and forum-based support ensure that you'll get the answers you need, when you need them. Our Direct-Trac support system is available 24x7, providing easy access to your complete incident history. Each license includes a one-year subscription for support and product updates - and unlike other vendors, we don't charge extra for phone support! 

Straightforward, flexible licensing: Syncfusion components are licensed on a simple per-developer basis with no royalties, run-time, or server-deployment fees. Each licensed developer may install on multiple personal machines. 

A viable base for standardization: The wide range of solid products in our suites allows our customers to reduce their dependence on multiple vendors and streamline their toolkits. 


What Syncfusion customers say 

We've been using the Syncfusion controls, Essential Studio Enterprise, for many years (since 2004), and we've found them extremely useful - in fact, we'll go so far as to say they're essential! The suite includes controls for Windows Forms, ASP.NET, WPF, Silverlight, and other controls that allow you to create native PDF files, Word and Excel documents, and so much more - in fact, it's one of the few suites that gives you all this functionality at such a great price. Source code is also available, should you need it as well. 

James Burns [UK] Review: ..... on ComponentSource

Syncfusion helps us to achieve our aggressive development timescales and provides excellent support when we need it. Our key business users at a top global bank were actually speech-less when they saw the level of functionality that at we have created over the past few months with Syncfusion.

Rohan Bethune, Senior Consultant, Hatstand Limited 

The Syncfusion grid is at least three times faster when expanding and 10 times faster when collapsing (using large data sets) than the solution we were previously using. Your support is the best that I have found, and as a developer I really appreciate this. Keep your excellent service - this made my buying decision that much easier. 

Chris Wescott, Log Tech Canada, Ltd. 

Component suites tailored to your needs

Essential Studio Enterprise Edition 

Essential Studio Enterprise Edition provides the most comprehensive suite of components and controls for .NET, comprising all the tools and libraries that are part of Essential Studio User Interface Edition, Reporting Edition, and Business Intelligence edition, including the fastest high-performance WPF Grid on the market, and the first 100% RDL-compatible WPF and Silverlight report viewer. This is the one package you need for developing in Silverlight, ASP.NET MVC, ASP.NET, WPF, and Windows Forms. 