The one package you need for developing in Silverlight, ASP.NET MVC, ASP.NET, WPF, and Windows Forms. 

Essential Studio Enterprise Edition 

Essential Studio User Interface Edition
Essential Studio Reporting Edition
Essential Studio Business Intelligence Edition

Essential Studio User Interface Edition

Essential Grid  (WinForms, WPF, ASP.NET, ASP.NET MVC, Silverlight)
Essential Tools  (WinForms, WPF, ASP.NET, ASP.NET MVC, Silverlight)
Essential Chart  (WinForms, WPF, ASP.NET, ASP.NET MVC, Silverlight)
Essential Diagram  (WinForms, WPF, ASP.NET, Silverlight)
Essential Edit  (WinForms, WPF)
Essential HTMLUI  (WinForms)
Essential Schedule  (WinForms, WPF, ASP.NET, ASP.NET MVC, Silverlight)
Essential Gauge  (WPF, ASP.NET MVC, Silverlight)

Essential Studio Reporting Edition (WinForms, WPF, ASP.NET, ASP.NET MVC, Silverlight)

Essential XlsIO
Essential DocIO
Essential Grouping
Essential Calculate
Essential PDF

Essential Studio Business Intelligence Edition  

Essential BI Grid   (WPF, ASP.NET, Silverlight)
Essential BI Client  (WPF, ASP.NET, Silverlight)
Essential BI Chart  (WPF, ASP.NET, Silverlight)
Essential BI Gauge (WPF, Silverlight) 
Essential BI PivotGrid  (WPF, ASP.NET, Silverlight)


Syncfusion components 

Essential Grid - A fully customizable, industry-standard, high-performance grid control with an extensive Excel-like feature set and outstanding performance. Supports extremely detailed customization down to the cell level. Numerous cell types and unmatched extensibility. Available for Silverlight, ASP.NET MVC, ASP.NET, WPF, and Windows Forms. 

Essential Tools - A collection of professional-class user interface controls with complete support for the Office 2007 look and feel. Docking windows, customizable menus, complete support for themes, localization, and much more. Available for Silverlight, ASP.NET MVC, ASP.NET, WPF, and Windows Forms. 

Essential Chart - A business-oriented charting component offering an innovative data object model that makes it easy to populate a chart with any kind of data source. Features advanced styles architecture. Available for Silverlight, ASP.NET MVC, ASP.NET, WPF, and Windows Forms. 

Essential Diagram - An extensible, high-performance .NET diagramming framework that can be used for developing Microsoft Visio-like interactive graphics and diagramming applications. Available for Windows Forms, WPF, ASP.NET, and Silverlight. 

Essential Edit - A syntax-highlighting edit control designed to be extensible and easy to use. Supports automatic outlining, multilevel undo-redo, rich formatting options, and easy configuration. Available for Windows Forms and WPF. 

Essential HTMLUI - A Windows Forms control that renders Hypertext Markup Language (HTML). With functionality similar to a Web browser, it is used primarily for display. Available for Window Forms. 

Essential Schedule - A UI control library available as part of Essential Studio User Interface Edition. This component lets you add Outlook-like scheduling support to your applications. Available for WPF, ASP.NET, ASP.NET MVC, and Silverlight. 

Essential Gauge - The Syncfusion WPF Gauge library allows you to use XAML and C# to draw circular gauge designs. The gauge control comes with sophisticated customization support that provides endless possibilities for control modification. With Essential Gauge, users can concisely display several data points or data ranges in a compact area. Data given in a control can be easily depicted and quickly understood by users of any level. Available for WPF, ASP.NET MVC, and Silverlight. 

Essential XlsIO - Read and write Microsoft Excel files with this library, which can be used on systems that do not have Microsoft Excel installed. Available for Silverlight, ASP.NET MVC, ASP.NET, WPF, and Windows Forms. 

Essential DocIO - A .NET library that can read and write Microsoft Word files. Features a full-fledged object model and can be used on systems that do not have Microsoft Word installed. Available for Silverlight, ASP.NET MVC, ASP.NET, WPF, and Windows Forms. 

Essential Grouping - A high-performance, extensible grouping engine that can group any list of data and handle large amounts of dynamic data. Supports related data and filters. Available for Windows Forms, WPF, ASP.NET, and ASP.NET MVC. 

Essential Calculate - Add calculation support to your business objects and easily set up forms that have calculation dependencies among various controls. Supports cross-sheet references and includes a function library with over 150 commonly used formulas. Available for Windows Forms, WPF, ASP.NET, and ASP.NET MVC. 

Essential PDF - A .NET library that allows you to produce and modify Adobe PDF files. It features a full-fledged object model, allowing for the easy creation and modification of PDF files from any .NET language. It has no dependency on any external library, and is built from the ground up using C#. Available for Silverlight, ASP.NET MVC, ASP.NET, WPF, and Windows Forms. 

Essential PivotGrid - Essential PivotGrid for WPF is a powerful cell-oriented, extensible grid control. It simulates the pivot table feature of Excel. The PivotGrid, as the name implies, pivots the data to organize it in a cross-tabulated form. The major advantage with a pivot grid is that you can extract the desired information from a large list within seconds. Along with presenting the data, a pivot grid also enables you to summarize and group data. It finds its main application in the financial domain, where it is used to organize and analyze business data.